---
title: tmux - the terminal window manager
layout: post
date: 2015-02-18
---

A dark full-screen terminal window. That is what you see mostly on my
screen. I've fallen in love with the terminal since I got to know
"cmd.exe" on my parents Windows computer. At first it was it's
strangeness that fascinated me. Luckily I found out that "cmd.exe" is
not the best shell prompt and discovered Bash and Linux a few years
after that.

Nowadays I'm still using terminal windows to get stuff done. Until
recently it really where windows. Many windows. My favorite shortcut
on my Linux machine was "Ctrl + Alt + t" - start a new terminal. At work
I'm using a Mac. My muscle memory contains key combinations to create
terminal windows and switch between them on both Linux and Mac. It was
okay. It never really bothered me. Then a colleague introduced me to
"tmux" - the <strong>t</strong>erminal<strong> mu</strong>ltiple<strong>x</strong>er.

The idea of tmux is really simple. Instead of having one terminal
window with one shell prompt, why not have one terminal window with
many shell prompts. What tmux basically does is it saves me from
opening a lot of terminal windows. But wait, there's more!

Sessions, windows and panes. That are the building blocks of tmux.
When I started to learn about it I needed some time to get used to
those words. Mapping the concepts of tmux to those of my
beloved terminal programs iTerm and gnome-terminal helped me.

![tmux terminal window analogy](/assets/tmux-terminal-analogy.png)

You can think of tmux as the equivalent of your terminal program, like
iTerm or gnome-terminal. A tab in your terminal program is what tmux
calls a window. When you start another process of your terminal
program, you would start a new session in tmux. When you split a tab
of your terminal window into different parts, each of those parts is
called a a pane in tmux (unfortunately you can't do that with gnome-terminal).
